---
title: "Do good explanations have to be true?"
date: 2021-05-02
tags: thinking
---

NOTE: This is my Theory of Knowledge Essay with a few edits. Please don’t
plagiarize my essay.

From a young age, humans are curious beings; the simple question of
"why" is perhaps the question parents hear most from their toddlers.
And when we got explanations to our "why?", we mostly assumed what a
superior told us was "true"; correct and in accordance with. However,
as I got older and learned more things, I realized not everything told
to me was true (in fact, sometimes quite wrong). I wondered, if
something untrue, was still beneficial to my advancement of knowledge.
However, I have come to realise that good explanations - that allow for
a majority of society to understand a concept, without the need for
specialized knowledge - should not be judged on their validity in
determining their value. In the Natural Sciences and Religious Knowledge
Systems, explanations do not have to be 100% true to provide good and
sometimes better explanations (than true explanations). Thus, to what
extent do Natural Sciences and Religious Knowledge Systems have to be
based on true explanations to be good? I believe to a certain extent
that the validity, or trueness, of an explanation is important; however,
whether it is true or not should not determine if an explanation is
good, rather how the explanation benefits society, and sometimes, this
occurs when explanations are *not* entirely true.

== Science

=== The Acid/Base Theory

image::/images/true/chem.jpg[]

In the Natural Sciences, there are
many complex phenomenons that are quite difficult to actually
understand. Thus, to what extent can imagination be used to understand
and teach complex scientific phenomenon? Such an example of this
occurred in in my Chemistry IBHL class. When I first learned about acids
and bases in junior high, I was taught the Bronsted Lowry theory of
acids and bases, and used my imagination to picture the acid giving off
a hydrogen ion to the base. This imagination aided me throughout high
school. However, I later learned about Lewis theory, which explains that
the base gives off a pair of electrons to the acid; an almost 180 degree
flip from the Bronsted Lowry theory! Although the Bronsted Lowry theory
is not true, I still use the theory to this day in modeling acid/base
behaviours; for instance, in my biochemistry class we model amino acids
with or without hydrogen atoms based on the pH. In our modern age, the
world continually progresses; thus, knowledge in every discipline
continually evolves, with Natural Sciences at the forefront of this
everyday change. However, the discoveries that scientists make usually
requires a great deal of knowledge to understand, knowledge much of
society does not have the time or privilege to possess. Thus, through
imagination, explanations in science can still be good, without being
true. And often, these basic, but not entirely true explanations, serve
their purpose in regular life. Complexity is not necessary everywhere in
life, and sometimes, a general understanding of certain topics is all
that is needed.

=== The Atomic Model

image::/images/true/bohr-quantum.jpg[]

A counterclaim I will now
examine centers around the theories of the model of the atom. When I
first learned Dalton’s billiard ball model in grade 10, it was quite
easy to see that this model was wrong. Then I learned Bohr’s model.
Simply put, it describes electrons orbiting around a central positively
charged center. I’ve probably drawn hundreds of these Bohr models for
the first three rows of elements in the periodic table. However, in my
chemistry HL class, I learned about the
https://www.khanacademy.org/science/physics/quantum-physics/quantum-numbers-and-orbitals/v/quantum-numbers-for-the-first-four-shells[quantum
mechanical model] of the atom: this theory states that there is an
electron cloud surrounding a positively charged nucleus, with some areas
having a higher density of electrons. Electrons move in random motion,
none of that orbit stuff. Did that mean I didn’t even need to draw all
those Bohr models? After learning about various atomic models, one may
argue how close we can get to the "most true" answer is the whole
purpose of science, and that a wrong explanation is simply useless to
society because it contains a fallacy, seen clearly with the
inaccuracies of the Dalton and Bohr model. Thus, these "outdated"
theories should no longer be taught. However, providing complex
explanations, such as the Schrödinger’s quantum model, which some may
find hard to understand, is not always the best way to explain
something. To visually understand that Boron has 5 electrons, should we
explain the quantum mechanical model to someone in junior high? Does it
add value to the 10th grader’s understanding to tell them that the first
two electrons are in 1s, the second two electrons are in 2s, and the
last electron is in 2p? Or does the Bohr model suffice? Only a few
individuals possess the knowledge to understand such theories: these
"true" theories that are full of complicated mathematics. This would
destroy the whole purpose of scientific exploration because if people do
not embrace new discoveries, hard work goes to waste; the Bohr model,
can provides a good explanation for someone who does not need to
understand why an electron in 2s behaves differently in 3s in their
everyday life. Thus, in the case of Natural Sciences, I believe that
good explanations do not always have to be true. In fact, they may
contain errors, yet still serve the purpose of providing scientific
knowledge to everyone in society.

== Religon

Another Area of Knowledge I will examine is Religious Knowledge Systems.
Religion is mostly based on explanations from texts and oral teachings,
such as the Holy Bible in Christianity. I myself have been educated in a
Western Catholic school system which regards the Bible as a historical
text. However in the Bible, there are many fantastical events that
simply would require magic (or something like that) to occur in today’s
society. Thus, to what extent can reasoning dispute that religious
explanations have to be true to be good? Although some biblical stories
are realistic, some stories contain inconsistencies. Many of us would
use our knowledge, and reason that if the creation story were true, that
all of the world’s population would be born by incest, because God only
put https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adam_and_Eve[two individuals on
earth]. Thus, in the case of religion, reasoning invites the idea that
true explanations are not necessarily the best. By viewing the Bible as
an allegory or a metaphor, rather than a historical text, we can all
draw deeper meaning from its content. More of society can relate to the
Bible, such as those who are scientific thinkers. For instance, the
creation story now draws a different meaning. The seven days are
symbolic of the long process, rather than a mere week. The presence of
only Adam and Eve is symbolic of the idea that we humans are all related
to each other by our feelings, our desires for happiness, and more.
Therefore, in such a text-based Area of Knowledge that is usually
heavily based on being true, sometimes, true explanations are not the
best for explaining the unknowns of life. Through metaphors,
explanations are no longer historically true, but they integrate into
society more smoothly and allow more people to apply the Bible to their
own lives.

However, others may argue that the Catholic Bible and many other
religious texts are legitimate historical records. However, to what
extent is this true? As a student, I find it very difficult to ignore
the scientific evidence we have today and believe the events of the
Bible occurred. For instance, I learned that the story of Noah’s Ark,
which states that all humans were killed in a flood, except for Noah and
the animals he saved; however, through reasoning, many would find this
story highly illogical and absurd. Most of the stories of the Bible are
simply too extraordinary to occur, and those who believe in the Bible as
history may force their views onto others. In a rapidly changing world,
such controversial biblical stories often cause uproar, causing debate
about abortions, stem cell treatments and much more, resulting in the
loss of these scientific advancements for all of society, impacting
individuals who do not align themselves with religion, but are forced to
live with rules governed by religious bodies. Furthermore, whether
religious texts are true life events will always remain unknown to us.
Therefore, these reasons compel me to believe that good explanations do
not have to be true. For the Area of Knowledge Religious Knowledge
Systems, everyone chooses to understand a religious text differently.
When I was attending Catholic school, I found it extremely difficult to
relate to these stories, because many would contradict my moral compass
or sound completely absurd. In my opinion, applying the parables as
metaphors for life, rather than true events, allows for more individuals
to relate to the Bible and aid us in life, rather than contradict life.

Since doing the ToK program, I began to wonder about the point of being
taught old, invalid scientific theories. However, I am glad I learned
these theories, because without learning them, there would be holes in
my knowledge. Additionally, these models provide insight into the ever
constant human endeavor for progress that I have come to appreciate and
hopefully pursue in my own life. Furthermore, in the case of Religious
Knowledge Systems, I was taught to believe that Biblical events were
true and I rebelled against the Bible because the events would
contradict my scientific beliefs. However, as I got older, I began to
view the Bible differently, and by using the Bible as an allegorical
text, rather than a history textbook, I was able to extract meanings and
messages that provide meaning and understanding in my life.

In conclusion, through the Areas of Knowledge of Natural Sciences and
Religious Knowledge systems, I firmly believe that good explanations do
not have to be true. When evaluating the "goodness" of an explanation
it’s trueness should only be one factor that determines its value. By
teaching complex scientific theories to the general population, most
will react with frustration, rather than enthusiasm; thus, I am grateful
that teachers have taught me theories that are not completely true,
because my enthusiasm is nurtured, I am motivated to continually gain
knowledge. Furthermore, using the Bible as a metaphor invites everyone
to interpret messages to their own personal understanding, allowing for
the inclusion of all. Therefore, how explanations can change the lives
of society should dictate its "goodness".
