+++
title = "my eating disorder, body dysmorphia and mental health during COVID-19"
date = 2022-04-02
draft = false
[extra]
updates = ["2022-03-28"]
+++

*TW: Mentions of exercise, diets, eating disorders*

I had forgotten about my eating disorder and body dysmorphia until the pandemic started in 2019. Suddenly, all the gyms were closing one by one, and I was slowly getting more and more nervous. Maybe some people rejoiced when the gyms closed, "Yay, no more annoying 6 AM gym for me!". The majority probably felt mildly annoyed, with thoughts of trying to get their money back or having to put aside that PR for another gym session. But I was terrified. My safety net was ripped away from me. All the thoughts of my eating disorder and body dysmorphia were back. I started skipping breakfast and eating less. I drank cups and cups of water to make myself feel full. I would get mad at myself if I didn't exercise, and I forced myself to try running again. I hated this feeling.
I still feel like this today. Even more so. With COVID-19 now being a constant in our society, I not only feel anxiety from my eating disorder and body dysmorphia but from those who are selfish enough to rip their mask off in the gym. In a place where many go to unload their mental anguish, some may choose to not go anymore because of these selfish people. Maybe you're thinking that COVID-19 isn't that serious and that I just like to complain. You can think what you want; maybe go tell that to people who had Polio. Tell them Polio "wasn't serious". Or those who have HIV. Tell them, "It isn't that serious".

I've lost my safe space. It now becomes a horrible gamble every time I want to go to the gym. Is it worth getting COVID-19 to do a gym session today? It is worth my mental sanity at the cost of getting myself and my loved ones sick? I guess most people don't care. Most people are selfish by nature. Even me. But I struggle to understand why someone can't put on a mask for an hour for the gym. Because let's be honest, you're not even doing something so intense that a mask would inhibit you. I've lifted 200 lbs off the ground with my N95 mask. I can do pull-ups with my N95 mask. The Canadian women's hockey team played their game in N95s. So stop complaining about masks. And if you don't want to wear one, then don't go to the gym. Since I don't want to go into a room of human sweat and spit during COVID-19, I run outside or do HIIT. It's a compromise of getting in a worse workout, but at the benefit of almost 0% of me catching COVID-19. If I can make sacrifices, so can you. If not for me, then for the doctors, surgeons, nurses, and teachers and everyone working the frontlines. If not for them, then at least for your parents, siblings, and friends. And if not for them, then you better hope COVID-19 doesn't have a surprise up its sleeve.
