---
title: Daily Log
date: 2022-05-31
---

:toc: 


Just a informal log of day to day feelings.

== July
=== July 4 - 6 
oh god these past few days have really drained my social and physical batteries. i went with two other interns to see the fireworks for july 4th (honestly fuck july 4th, but i went because its an eXpeRiEncE) and everyone else seemed want to see the fireworks too since all the fucking parks were so crowsed and it smelled like weed the entire time. it got really crowded, and it truly seems like everyone just fucking forgot about covid. but that wasn't the worst part of the night. not only were the fireworks kinda shit, but getting back to the apartment was fucking terrible. everyone's trying to go to the metro and people are so fucking inconsiderate of other people, they will push and shove you to get into the subway. people also packed themselves like sardines (many didnt wear masks) into the subway. that was truly fucking god awful. these past few days have given me confirmation that i do not want to ever live in nyc. i was also constantly thinking about the shootings that were occuring in other states. there's nothing special about me or nyc that makes nyc any less likly to have a shooting. i kept thinking, "if this is my last day, would i be ok?". it's really not fair that americans have to ask themselves that every day they wake up. along with the news about roe vs wade being overturned, i do not want to contribute any more money or support to the usa after this internship ends. 

this internship offered the answer to two questions i have: do i want to live in the usa and do i want ot work in industry? the answer to both questions is no. of course, nyc doesn't represent all of or even many parts of the usa. but the shit storm of politics and joke of the democractic party gives me no hope for the usa. 

and while nyc is walkable, its fucking terrible to walk around in. trucks are parked all over the sidewalk, people don't respect the stop/walk signs and go as they please, cars park in the bus stop signs and it just seems like no one respects others. it's also loud as fuck because there's fucking trucks everywhere and you have to practically shout to the people walking beside you. 

and the metro is terrible. the trains screech so much i think i'll be deaf from the screeching soon. the platforms are like half a metre wide in some stations and thats just fucking great because you have to keep watching to make sure no one fucking pushes you off. 

also there's so many small inconveniences that pushed me over the edge. my work project is boring, im bored, none of the dryers were free and i had to wait 2 hours for someone to take their fucking clothes out of the dryer, no one wears masks (unless they are on the train?? what makes you think the train could have covid yet the work office doesn't) (and people seem to be fucking surprised out of their damn pants when they get sick are yall that ignorant of how transmissive covid is? yes going to a bar is a high risk location for covid). like im really just done.

=== June 30 - July 3 
well i haven't been tracking what's occured in the past few days, but i will list it out now.  so everyone knows a bad manager can ruin everything. i think thats what happened at microsoft, and it's clouded my feelings about the tech industry. i chose to work at capital one because it's also in finance, so i wanted to see the differences between a tech company like microsoft and a company like capital one. i'll just list the reasons out in no particular order. 

* use of third party software: capital one has libraries hosted on their own platform and indepedently reviews each aws service. you also have to install and access third party software through a VPN and proxy. many of my debugging issue have been due to the proxy. it's definitely interesting to see how many more levels there are to using third party software here than at microsoft. 

* java everywhere: it's true, banks are slow on the tech. though i was surprised to see that some interns were using go. but the languages being used are pretty standard: java, python, go, js, swift

* less "company spirit"?: in a good way. people are more treating this as a job, rather than their life's dream like what many interns at microsoft would (it's my dream to work at microsoft). i kind of find this refreshing, in comparision to the garage program where we had culture constantly screamed about at us

* better work lift balance than microsoft: microsoft likes to talk about their work life balance but at capital one this is where i've seen the most chill interns. microsoft work life balance isn't bad, but capital one's is even more.

well that was work updates, time for personal updates
* going to the gym opened up a whole can of worms of body dismorphia. in the past few monthes i've avoided looking in the mirror and been mostly wearing sweats. but going to the gym has caused alot of the "old days" to resurface, to when i was more fit, physically and mentally in regards to strength training. weightlifting is something that helps me with mental health though, and as i'm regaining my strength i feel better about myself

* i also ate american brunch for the first time, authentic tacos (which i didn't like) and levain cookies!

* also dyed my hair!

* also trader joe's is awesome

image::/images/log/june-july3.png[]
 
= June
== June 29
i don't like tacos idk why i keep going out for them : )
levain cookies are good tho! i think i am spending too much money

image::/images/log/june2029.jpg[]

== June 28
went out for kbbq with a fellow intern friend!

== June 27 
rainy day, boring day at work.

== June 25 
went out for hotpot, shopping, donuts, free ice cream and nail polish with the other interns. 30 degree weather.

...

== June 23
bad food day. binged and feel like shit. it's my first binge in i think a year.

== June 22
didn't go into office.

== June 21
didn't go into office.

== June 20
went to chinatown, ktown and went to macy's! tbh don't see the appeal in macy's

== June 19
lazy day, got in a good leg day, ate a bunch of kitkats and hichew. more
existential thinking about what i wanna do.

== June 18
went to hmart and trader joe's today! also got pastrami, corned beef and reuben sandwiches and mango green tea. 

image::/images/log/june18.png[]

== June 17
image::/images/log/june17.png[]

== June 16
boring day. was sleepy.

== June 15
finally wrote some code. ðŸ˜© using vim at work is a flex until u start making a mess of commands.

== June 14 
went shopping and got a donut. 

== June 13
nothing much.

== June 12
i got lost buying groceries, found a street with a bunch of food trucks, bought tacos, and then while walking back to the apartment walked into a movie set.

image::/images/log/june12.jpg[]

== June 11
for some reason i can't sleep at night but i can fall asleep in seconds during
	the day? i slept at 1, woke up at 6, went ot the gym, then slept from 7
	to 930.

gonna just read some papers, write a bit, relax. i wanna buy new running shoes and shorts though.

== June 10
how does taxes work for a dual citizen. 

anyways, on a whim i joined the other interns and went to central park and times square!

image::/images/log/june10.png[]

== June 9
macbook is still busted. been speedrunning onboarding and kind of realizing i
do not really like living in downtown. entities that are very valuble to my
	daily happiness include wholesale stores (like Costco), Asian stores
	(T&T), lots of empty or near empty trails for running, and air that
	doesn't smell like garbage? lots of interns here are going to bars and
	eating out most days of the week, and i can't really force myself to
	join them, because i feel like i'm spending a lot of money and im kinda scared of going to a bar.
	another dynamic difference is that there are alot more male interns. at
	microsoft, the split was pretty even, whereas at capital one there's
	probably like 10 male interns for every female intern. it's a bit
	isolating to say the least. 

on the other hand, i've been reading a theory of computation textbook and
beautiful racket and i really enjoy it. 

== June 8
i slept past my alarm by 4 hours and missed the first laptop set up session. ooooof

== June 7
got a bagel. 

image::/images/log/june7.jpg[]

== June 6
nyc day 2. arrived last night very tired. currently just vibing. wall street is
pretty nice. the architecture in nyc is very variable. sometimes it reminds me
of downtown vancouver. took a walk around, there's a body of water and i saw
people with ice cream but i couldn't figure out where they were getting that
ice cream. also there's just like trash bags everywhere.

== June 3
another day where i did nothing. was exhausted. 

== June 2
was trying to get some rust stuff to work and it wasn't and that kinda annoyed
me. i don't think i like "learning through hacking". i like having enough
knowledge to "figure it out myself", so to speak. i don't think i don't like
"unfamiliar problems" but i really hate just feeling like i'm in the dark. in
chemistry and cpsc 110, i'd frequently do "hard problems" or "new problems" (of
course to a computer scientist or chemist these problems aren't hrd or new but
to a noob like me they are.) like my ochem class kicked my ass, and we had to
literally create reaction mechanisms for chemical molecules that don't exist.
there's no "search that chemical molecule up on google" because my chem proof
literally pulled it out of his brain. anyways, people always say "you didn't
waste your time" when you struggle to learn. when i've spent 4 hours trying to
think of a reaction mechanism i've reinforced my knowledge of chemistry and i
now "know what doesn't work and why". but when i "learn through hacking" and i
come across the solution by luck after like 5 hours, i just feel like i've
wasted all this time. i don't know why what i was doing doesn't work and why
this random internet solution does work. 

i was never the kid who "put computers together" like lmfao. i just read books
about fairies and shit. my dad bought me a circuit game thing, and i put
together the circuits, saw the light blink and was like ok.

== June 1
tired.

= May

== May 31
ubc does course registration based on your year standing, and i majorly fucked
up in second year by not making sure i was taking enough cs/math courses to be
promoted to third year (i was 0.4 credits away from being promoted to third
year standing). since i was stuck in second year standing, i got a shit
registration time (second year students are the last to register for courses),
so this meant i got "whatever was left" and i couldn't register for literally
any third year CS courses even though the only second year courses i only left
to do were the required second year math courses. i randomly got a seat into
cspc 313 because i kept checking the ssc every like 5 mins and then was one of
the last students to get moved off the waitlist into cpsc 320. and then i saw
like at least 10-20 people drop the third year cs courses i wanted to take but
i couldnt register for since it was past the register date, and i wasn't keen
on joining a course like 3 weeks into it. since i could only register for 2
third year courses i couldn't get promoted to fourth year (this is my fourth
year at ubc but im in third year standing now). and now i have to do a bunch of
course schedule juggling between my chem and cs courses, and one of the cs
courses i was planning to take suddenly changed times and that threw my whole
schedule out of balance and now i'm replanning my next two years again. in
second year i was a super confused student, and i was exploring courses in micb
and chem, instead of taking the required math courses, and i feel like i was
punished for "exploring". i kinda wish i had an advisor (my friend at an ivy
school gets assigned their own advisor and they meet like a few times
throughout the year). anyways i guess i feel stressed, because course planning
is just another thing i have to worry about along with all the stuff happening
in the world.

i also procrastinated something i should have done like one month ago. 
