---
title: "Feminist Technoscience Strategies in Computer Science"
tags: feminism
---

[Source](http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A837505&dswid=-9392)

> “I had a sense of not being quite integrated, my self was missing because I could not identify with [them]… [I was] a different sort of being, not quite of the same species. [I saw this] as a lack in myself” (Lugones 1990 p. 393).

> The experiences I had are shared by many others (e.g. female students) who do not feel at home in the discipline, and, just as Maria Lugones writes, might see this as a lack in themselves. These experiences and feelings of ‘outsiderness’ are driving forces for making the discipline more inclusive, so that different ways of ‘being’ are accepted. [p20]

> When I started my research, my thinking was (implicitly) dominated by the idea of defining a problem and then finding a way to resolve it. This is fundamentally and deeply rooted within the engineer, although it is seldom articulated and made visible. I was trained to delimit a problem, make it as simple as possible, and then apply the most straightforward solution. This is an approach where logical and abstract thinking are emphasized. Within CS, I was further trained in the use of algorithmic approaches to problem solving. This tends to encourage linear thinking about problems. Thus, my education and professional life had trained me in a certain way of thinking and approaching problems.  [21]

> My argument for focusing on this ‘paradigmatic basis’ of computer science was that issues concerning CS itself and its knowledge processes were for the most part absent in research and discussions on gender and CS. [21]

> The process of blackboxing is equivalent to the process of naturalisation, in which something (an artifact, an idea, a concept, etc.) is stripped of its origins, context and consequences and is regarded as given, as self-evident. [22]

- knowledge is intertwined with communication and language.

> “The field of computer science education research has a cross-disciplinary structure, and encompasses computer science – of course – but also a wide range of other disciplines: pedagogy, psychology, cognitive science, learning technology, sociology to mention a few. What unifies this diversified field is the aim to improve learning and teaching within computer science, and thereby to contribute to computer science.” (Ibid p. 23). 

> Since technology is seen as neutral, this stance has not seldom led to seeing women as the problem: women should be informed / educated / adapted to technology: “Women shall be enticed into existing practice and adapt to it.” (Trojer 1999, p. 13). With this view, it is mainly women who are expected to change. [26]

> There is also a tendency within liberal feminism to treat men and women as homogeneous groups, ignoring differences between individuals, as well as for example ethnicity and class. In practice, liberal feminist projects have had very little impact on the gender balance within technology or computer science; in fact this approach can be seen as
reproducing and reinforcing the status quo. [26]

> Feminist studies of technology can to a large extent be regarded as part of the STS tradition, in that the starting point and approach can be summarized as the social construction / shaping of technology. According to Vehviläinen (2001) this approach sees technology as a process consisting of three interrelated parts: artefacts, knowledge and social practices. [28]

> However, as Wajcman (1991) notes, there are fundamental differences between (natural) science and technology: technology needs to be understood as more than applied science, since it is primarily about the creation of artefacts (ibid p.13).

> Around this time, a shift towards understanding technology as culture became more apparent. According to this view, both gender and technology can be understood not as fixed and given, but as processes, which are constantly being formed and re-formed in ongoing negotiations in relation to each other. [28]

> Henwood provides a good historical overview of how computing changed from a woman’s job to one occupied mainly by men, which she sees as linked to changing definitions of skill. [28]

> “Technology meanings are not ‘given’, they are made. … We should be focused on that knowledge … we have to be involved at the level of definition, of making meanings and in creating technological culture.” (Ibid p. 44).

> As pointed out by Grint and Gill (1995), the idea that technology and masculinity are intimately related seems to be accepted by most feminist writers within this tradition, who rather than challenging this idea try to understand why this is the case. [29]

> One example of such a pervasive idea is that men are interested in technology per se, while women are interested in what it can be used for. [29]

> “Observations are theory-laden, theories are paradigm-laden, and paradigms are culture laden: hence there are and can be no such things as value-neutral, objective facts.” (Harding 1986, p.102).

> An example of a methodology is, in my opinion, the importance stressed within feminist research of placing the researcher in the same plane as the researched, which puts the entire research process (not only the research object) under scrutiny (Harding 1987). Th e researcher is not a neutral, invisible, anonymous person, but a visible, situated person with specific interests and behaviour who becomes part of the whole process. Th is approach can be called reflexivity, and I will discuss it in more detail below. This kind of methodology also follows explicitly from the epistemological positioning. [35]

> Feminism is not a dogma but a set of critical questions [37]

> “Diff raction is a metaphor for another
kind of critical consciousness … one committed to making a diff erence […] So I use
it to talk about making a diff erence in the world, as opposed to just being endlessly
self-refl ective.” (Haraway 2000, pp. 101f., 104). [38]

# Introduction to Part A: Crossing Boundaries [45]
> what it means to be simultaneously engineer/computer scientist and feminist technoscience researcher, to live on boundaries

## Paper A1 [49]

> As engineer, this type of critical reflexivity is not part of my repertoire [...]  

> “The reality is that the “doing” of science is, at its best, a gripping and fully absorbing activity…. The net result is that scientists are probably less reflective of the “tacit assumptions” that guide their reasoning than any other intellectuals of the modern age. […] Indeed, the success of their enterprise does not, at least in the short run, seem to require reflexivity. Some would even argue that very success demands abstaining from reflection upon matters that do
not lend themselves to “clear and distinct” answers”. (Fox Keller 1992, p. 27) [51]

> The reality of engineering work today is a fragmented process, “in which most engineers occupy specialist roles, where reductionism is acceptable, while only a few ever occupy heterogeneous roles, where holism is necessary” [51]

>  She argues that postmodernism, and in particular poststructuralism, by its insistence, indeed requirement, of recognising the knower as situated, actually frees the writer to explore new ways of knowing. Writing, according to Richardson, is not only the common academic form of reporting on one’s findings, but also a method of inquiry, as well as a method of knowing. [52]

> experimental ones such as “narrative of the self”, in which the writer can write in a personalised way, telling stories about her or his lived experiences (Richardson 1994, p. 521). This form of writing can be used to “say what might be unsayable in other circumstances” (ibid, p. 521). [52]

## Paper A2
> I would characterize these projects, these interventions, as targeting equality issues,
and in fact, creating exclusions, instead of inclusions (singling out female students in
the gender segregated teaching project for instance). [74]

> During my work with these projects, I gradually started questioning these “women- into-technology”-oriented approaches, realising that the equality project is not enough. [74]

> What are the challenging boundaries involved in my work? One of them concerns epistemologies, where the feminist epistemologies that are foundational for me, such as situated knowledge and partial perspectives, and thus also the world-view, is completely different from most of the epistemological foundations of CS. There are also questions of definitions: such as what is considered to be CS, which in turn create inclusions and exclusions: who is considered to have valid CS knowledge? [74]

# Introduction to Part B: Focussing Foundations [83]

## Paper B2

### Why should the issue of lack of women in CS be given attention?

- shortage of labor force: women are reserve for a shortage of men => rather cynical, regarding women as inferior
- missing women contribution:
 - "is the idea that women have special qualities simply by virtue of the fact that they are women."
  - "idea that women have special qualities simply by virtue of the fact that they are women"
  - "Women are then burdened with the responsibility of being representatives of their gender and contributing “something new and extra”."
 - "“It is one of our major follies that, whatever we say, we don’t in reality regard women as suitable for scientific careers. We thus neatly divide our pool of potential talent by two” (C.P. Snow, Rede lectures, Cambridge, 1959, quoted in Pearl 1995 p. 26)."
- gender equality issues
- broader representation of developers within CS
  - “The more diverse our profession, the more creative and flexible we can be – and the more important our contribution to the world we live in” (Pfleeger 1990 p. 14)

### How is the problem perceived?

- individual: female students have usually have less experience with computers/programming than male peers when entering university
- structural: form of structure of curriculum and pedagogy of education programmers, and structure of hierarchies within academia and industry
- symbolic: strongly male-dominated culture and image of what it is to be a computer scientist

- many initiatives thus far: focussing on issue of information (change attitudes of women) and individual level (identifying women as the problem)

> “The low female representation in technical faculties is often seen as a quantitative problem, that is the problem is placed outside the own practice and the solution is to inform girls (preferably from day care and all through school) about the interesting content in technology. Women shall be enticed into existing practice and adapt to it” [92]

- one-sided adaptation on the part of women

*fourth level of obstacles*

> discipline and epistemological issues concerning computer science itself and its knowledge processes. 

#### Who perceives the problem?
**Computer Scientists**

- "women into technology" approach has been adopted
- focus on low number of women and issues of recruitment, education, training, equity
- mainly individual level
- psychological approach trying to explain low numbers through personality

> problems facing women in introductory programming courses, often because they have far less experience with computers and programming than their male peers, is a recurring theme

- issues of education, culture and perceptions of CS are also addressed
- mathematics in CS: idea women are "put off" by mathematics
- also opposing state that CS ought to be more like mathematics
> “Could it be the ill-defined nature of computing is what drives them away?”

**Summary of how the problem is commonly viewed**

(1) Lack of Knowledge about Career Prospects
(2) The Image of Computer Science and Information Technology
(3) A Perceived Lack of Confidence Amongst Women Students Despite Their
Obvious Abilities and Successes
(4) A Lack of Women Lecturers
(5) Computing as a Male Domain
(6) The Learning Environment Is Often Not Informed by Contemporary
Learning Theory
(7) The Importance of Prior Computing Experience.

> There is a general belief in rather clear and simple solutions and at the same time that changes are necessary in society. It seems there is a willingness to accept the need for revolutionary changes in society, culture and attitudes, but not when it comes to one’s own discipline, where more surface-oriented solutions are suggested. [95]

- CS as a given

> “The nature of the computing discipline itself needs to be addressed by its participants: what is computing science? This need is slowly being recognised but the variety of answers reflects the problem” (Stack 1997 p. IX)

> “We have educated thousands of developers, engineers, and researchers who see their roles as technology inventors, and only a few who start by understanding situations and people and let that drive the creation of technologies. By presenting the major challenges of computing as technical challenges, we have lost the interest of many brilliant technical minds – often female – because their interest is in using that brilliance to solve real problems rather than creating technology for technology’s sake.” (Borg 2001 p. 141)
- *but why or do women intrinsically desire to "solve real problems?"*

- too little communication with research and knowledge acquired within other disciplines
- unwillingness to question the discipline itself and its practices
- problem has been constructed in a way to limit the solutions

**Social Scientists** [97]

- focus on "gender and CS"
- early research appraochs problem on individual level: "that changes within CS may offer women a unique opportunity because changes in the mental model of computing will make it more ‘feminine’, or that object-oriented programming would require a reconsideration of traditional concepts of masculinity and femininity"
- Sherry Turkle:
  - soft mastery: more interactive approach to computer as tool and co-operative behaviour
  - hard mastery: control over machine and competitive behaviour
  - neither style superior for programming but computer expertise is defined in terms of hard mastery

- social constructivist approach: historical and cultural contexts are dominant factors behind under-representation of women in computing
- Judy Wajcman: argues against Turkle's view
  - cognition can not be stripped of its social content to reveal pure logical reasoning”

> “It was because programming was initially viewed as tedious clerical work of low status that it was assigned to women. As the complex skills and value of programming were increasingly recognized, it came to be considered creative, intellectual and demanding ‘men’s work’. Thus, depending on the circumstances, different cognitive styles may be characterized as ‘masculine’ or ‘feminine’ according to the power and status that attaches”

> “The culture and ideas of a small male minority of students, the computer hackers, come to dominate computer science in the eyes of the female students. This minority culture is reinforced by the values and interests of the most powerful (male) groups in computer science, the male professors and teachers, and their disciples, the dedicated students. In this way, a male-dominated and machine-fixated culture works to marginalize women” (Rasmussen and Hapnes 1991, p 1107).

_ Nissen: technology as made by men for men, control of machine as masculine symbol

- a need to understand how discipline of computing is constituted historically
  - Clegg: Computing was institutionalised alongside other male-dominated disciplines, establishing itself as intellectually challenging, tough and abstract. She claims that computing is neither an extension of mathematical thinking nor an applied science.
  - computing is concrete (rather than abstract) science with materiality and social practice [100]
- "what is wrong with computing rather than what is wrong with women"
  - Linda Stepulevage and Sarah Plumeridge: ow certain dogmas of science, such as physics as the paradigm of science, and ‘pure mathematics’ as value-free, are relevant to computer science.

> “Computer science as the pure focuses on understanding the world via a rationality based in the abstract; therefore, the concrete products resulting from the discovery and development of algorithms can exist outside the domain of computer science and there is no need for critical self-reflection” (Ibid p. 316-317).

- solely focussing on social aspects like history ad culture other factors may be overlooked.

> There can be a tendency to focus on questions of why, i.e. to explain, rather than to suggest what can be done about the problem. [100]

**Cross- and Interdisciplinary Groups and Forums**

> “the decline in the number of young women selecting computer science majors was attributable to a male-oriented paradigm in computer science” [101]

>“the decline in young women…can be attributed to the existing educational paradigm that separates studies of science, math, and computer science from studies of the humanities” (Ibid p. 1), and she advocates a more integrated approach. Thus, she focuses on the structural level combined with the symbolic level. [101]

> She argued for a new approach in the introductory course, using application software packages instead of procedural programming. This would give students immediate success in doing something useful, while still illustrating and reinforcing CS concepts. This is an example of an intervention at the structural level. [101]
- similar to the idea of HtDW and having images be easily rendered in BSL
- also issue of "black box" of APIs

- two different styles of programming: [101]
  - ‘planning’ approach (rational, structured, control- led)
  - ‘bricolage’ approach (concrete, negotiating).
- no difference in end product, just process
  - planners: at a distance, bricolage: closeness to the objects of work
- most men are planners, most women prefer bricolage => different attitudes towards knowledge

> The emerging object-oriented approach is seen as potentially revolutionary: “first, within the world of programming through legitimising alternative methods; second, in the larger intellectual culture, by supporting trends in cognitive theory that challenge the traditional canon”

- at CMU: “Women in Computer Sciences: Closing the Gender Gap in Higher Education”
- do women approach the study of computer science differently from men?”

> Students’ understanding (both intellectual and social) of the nature of the field is a key concept, but women often and the area too narrow, they feel they have to be too narrowly focused (Fisher et al 1997).

> “The computer science culture assumes that men will succeed. […] Hence it bolsters men’s confidence and sense of belonging. This same culture does not assume (often accurately) that women conform; hence they enjoy no default expectation of success, and their interests and attachments to computing may be regarded as deviant from the norm, and less serious than those of the male students”

> The aim of the group has been to broaden the culture and curriculum, to show that there are multiple ways to be a computer scientist and to be interested in the subject, and to demonstrate that valuable contributions to the field come from people with different sets of attachment to computers (Margolis et al 2000). Among examples of the changes that they have implemented are: different entry points to the curriculum, depending on the level of experience, an “immigration course” to expose new students to a wide variety of CS issues and applications in order to counteract the “all programming” stereotype, and interdisciplinary courses. The project has been a success, with an increase in female enrolment in the computer science programme from 7% in 1995 to 42% in 2000 (Margolis, Fisher 2002).

> “…change computer science into a field that is engaging and interesting for a much larger and more diverse group of students. The goal is not to fit women into computer science as it is currently taught and conceived. Rather, a cultural and curricular revolution is required to change computer science so that the valuable contributions and perspective of women are respected within the discipline.” (Margolis, Fisher 2002, p. 6).

> “The perspective that computer science can make itself stronger by incorporating the values typical of women in the field changes the question from ”how can women change to fit into computer science” to “how can CS change to attract more women”.” (ibid. p. 60)

* but what are the perspectives and values of women? 
** risk of reduction and essentialism
** oversimplification leads to dichotomic deadlock => we gain nothing by putting men and women against each other

is "cultural and curricular revolution" enough? nothing at the discipline level mentioned

> It is not only about how computer science is “taught and conceived”, it is also about how it is thought, talked and understood as knowledge and discipline.

> The attitude of the authors appears to be that they take the fundamentals of CS as given. As noted above, they explicitly concentrate on curriculum, pedagogy and culture. As I have argued above, this will lead to a limited understanding. I argue that by exclusively focusing on social and cultural factors, we limit ourselves and fail to see other deeply rooted influences (such as issues of knowledge).

> However, the problems of acceptance for a ‘foreign’ discipline within CS should not be underestimated and can necessitate compromises in order to be accepted and to be able to work towards transformation.

**Feminist/Gender Researchers Within CS**

> “Whose science? Whose knowledge?” (Harding 1991)

> The use of language has proved to be very important in our understanding of ideas and the images they call to mind. The presence of clearly gender-marked metaphors can be a factor in supporting the gender structure within the discipline. Metaphors create images that will be of importance in the knowledge process (Keller 1995).

* feminist perspective of cs: Tone Bratteteig and Guri Verne

> As a totally different example, they discuss the idea of getting girls interested in computing through games, but they find it difficult and questionable to design alternative games for girls: “The question we are left with is whether we change anything or rather conserve status quo by implementing the conditions and characteristics of some present female culture” (Ibid, p. 67).

> Among other topics, she discusses the differences between propositional knowledge (‘knowing that’) and skills knowledge (‘knowing how’), or mental vs. embodied knowledge, and how the former, which is usually associated with men, has been seen as superior to the latter (often seen as linked to women).

> “Knowing is not necessarily a matter of saying and representing what is the case but can also be a kind of practical involvement with the world” (Belenky et al.199723, quoted in Moggridge 1998, p. 34).

> She discusses what she sees as three levels of criticism and solution: “add- more-women”, the “liberal level” (qualitative changes to the environment, including teaching), and the “radical level”: “This is where we start looking for a really new science and encouraging a transformation not only of the way we do it, but also what it is that we do” (Grundy 1997, p. 9).

> Anne Moggridge points out that there is an increasing amount of relevant literature on gender and computing, but that most of it has been produced outside of the discipline


> If the problem is defined in terms of arguments such as: women have less experience with computers, women lack self-confidence, women have too few role models, then the approaches are rather straightforward: give women experience with computers, strengthen their self-confidence, provide role models. What happens then when the expected effect of the action fails to appear? Do we return to the definition of the problem or do we blame the women?

* women are compared to an existing ‘male’ norm of success, albeit most often implicitly.

> We have to “ask what is wrong with computing rather than what is wrong with women” (Clegg and Trayhurn 1999).

### Paper B2 [117]

> ”The reasons for the divergence in perception between feminist critics and women scientists are deep and complex. Though undoubtedly fuelled by political concerns, they rest finally neither on vocabulary, nor on logic, nor even on empirical evidence. Rather, they reflect a fundamental difference in mind-set between feminist critics and working scientists – a difference so radical that a “feminist scientist” appears today as much a contradiction in terms as a “woman scientist” once did”.

> “CS departments in engineering colleges graduate proportionately fewer women on average than CS departments in non-engineering colleges” (p. 107).

> Why does Tracy Camp use the argument of labour shortage? This argument implies that women are regarded as a reserve labour force. In itself, this is not a neutral argu- ment: are women a concern only in their capacity as a ‘reserve’, i.e. when there are not enough (talented) men? It then becomes a cynical argument, even though it is presented as a completely reasonable one, that points to a (perhaps subconscious) view of women as inferior to men, as ‘second best’.

> For example, she writes: “there are a number of reasons…”. The argument of labour shortage is sometimes used in the belief that this is politically acceptable or neutral. By using this argument, it is possible to avoid discussions concerning equality and gender issues, which are often considered more or less irrelevant by the community (Egeland 2001). It thus becomes a means to obtain changes that might actually be wanted for other reasons (e.g. gender equality). So the motive of a critical labour shortage might in this context be used strategically.

> “We need to keep open the possibility that a particular representation has been selected for purely instrumental reasons, to achieve a particular goal, and has nothing to do with the values of the one making the representation” (Bacchi 1999, p. 9).

> This is yet another sign of the epistemology: the invisible researcher confirms the objectivity paradigm, “the god-trick of seeing everything from nowhere” (Haraway 1991, p. 189).

### Paper B3 [125]
> The approaches to knowledge and epistemological basis for computer science (CS), on which research and education as well as development of applications are founded, are fundamental for its production of knowledge. These have however been fairly little reflected upon and studied, in contrast to societal impacts of CS.

> Computer science comprises both internal and external theories or stories (Fox Keller 1992)

> Is CS a mixture of other disciplines or does it have its own unique core?

> CS is fairly young as a discipline in its own right and is still being formed and the subject of many discussions regarding its core character and content. The boundaries of CS are constantly debated: what is to be considered to be within the discipline and what is to be considered to be outside (but connected to) it, for example where does software engineering and human-computer interaction belong?

**ACM Task Force on the Core of Computer Science (1989)**
- theory => mathematics
- abstraction => modelling and rooted in experimental scientific method
- design => engineering

> The fundamental question underlying all of computing is, “What can be (effectively) automated?”” (Ibid p. 12)


> The algorithmic side of computer science is emphasized by Judith Gal-Ezer and David Harel in their discussion “What is CS” (Gal-Ezer and Harel 1998 p. 78): “The point is that CS is not only the scientific basis of a major technological revolution, but has at its heart a special and powerful way of thinking—algorithmically—which is required in dealing with the ever-complex modern world, and which is becoming crucial in many other scientific and engineering disciplines, too.”

> Abelson and Sussman directly address this (Abelson and Sussman 19858, quoted in Denning et al. 1989 p.11-12): “The computer revolution is a revolution in the way we think and in the way we express what we think. The essence of this change is the emergence of what might best be called procedural epistemology – the study of the structure of knowledge from an imperative point of view, as opposed to the more declarative point of view taken by classical mathematical subjects. Mathematics provides a framework for dealing precisely with notions of ‘what is’. Computation 9 provides a framework for dealing precisely with notions of ‘how to’”.

* CS: dichotomies => algorithmic side and systems side

> “On the cruelty of really teaching computing science”, Edsger Dijkstra claims that “computing science is—and will always be—concerned with the interplay between mechanized and human symbol manipulation usually referred to as ‘computing’ and ‘programming’, respectively” (Dijkstra 1989 p. 1401), and that computing should be localised in “the direction of formal mathematics and applied logic” (Ibid p. 1402).

> One of the central changes that can be seen in CC2001 is the inclusion of professional practice as an integral component in the CS curricula. Where the 1989 report identified three paradigms, this could now be seen as expanded: “All computer science students must learn to integrate theory and practice, to recognize the importance of abstraction, and to appreciate the value of good engineering design”

* inclusion of professional practice and computing became broader


* applications domains are front lines and skills connect technical performance with customer
> Peter Denning regards computing as the discipline and IT as the profession, and he claims that there is currently a gap between the two. Computing is no longer the driving force, controlling the field, and he advocates that it should cross the chasm and seek leadership within the new profession, by for example accommodating “embodied professional knowledge” (Denning 2001, p. 24). A similar argument is made by Steve Cunningham: “Any computing education that does not pay attention to the user’s role in computing is missing the most vibrant and exciting part of computing today.” (Cunningham 1998, p. 4a).

> Lynn Andrea Stein argues the need for a shift in the underlying metaphor of computing, from the traditional metaphor, “computation as calculation”, towards a metaphor of “computation as interaction” (Stein 1999).

#### paradigms of cs

> Frances Grundy raises questions concerning the ‘fundamental nature’ of the discipline
of computer science. She challenges the three major paradigms identified within CS:
mathematics, science and engineering (Grundy 2000a, 2000b, 1998). She discusses the
role of mathematics in computing, and in particular what role mathematics actually
plays for abstraction. Her argument is that mathematics is only one type of abstraction
involved in computing, and she further claims that mathematics is a status symbol and
has been used as an argument for making CS into a science.

> Abstraction is considered very important for CS. However, the products of CS are very concrete. Why is abstract, formal and logical thinking and knowing seen as superior within CS? Sue Clegg (Clegg 2001) argues that computing is neither an extension of mathematical thinking nor an applied science.

- computing as concrete science with materiality and social practices

- concrete thinking in CS => feminist epistemology with dedication to concrete learning introduces new ideas for gaining knowledge

- OO: based on idea everything and everybody can be represented in terms of objects
- OO should not be used for analysis of human worlds, only realization of software

## Paper B4 [155]
> “…observations are theory-laden, theories are paradigm-laden, and paradigms are culture- laden: hence there are and can be no such things as value-neutral, objective facts.” (Harding 1986, p.102).

> Feminist epistemologies are thus critical of objectivity paradigms, and of the neutral and objective observer, what Donna Haraway terms “the God-trick of seeing everything from nowhere” (Haraway 1991, p. 189). Instead, Donna Haraway develops the concept of situated knowledge.

- situatedness: concious epistemological positioning => part of practice and knowledge production and it means actively taking a stand

> Thus, her alternative to relativism and universalism is partial, locatable, situated knowledge.

> Thus, feminist epistemologies acknowledge (embodied) experience as a valid basis for knowledge, and argue for a unity of knowledges, to borrow Hilary Rose’s expression, of “hand, heart and brain”.

> Crutzen and Gerrissen argue that object orientation is based on the idea of objectivity and neutrality of representation, as well as the idea that everything and everybody can be represented in terms of objects.

* treat as concrete science => new ways of gaining knowledge

> What consequences can naturalisation have? For one thing, it is easy to see how everything, from hardware to software tend to be taken as ‘natural’, as something given, once they have existed for some time.

> This means that the reasons why things are constructed in a certain way are forgotten, and hence there is likely to be a tendency not to question whether this was actually ‘the best way’ to do something, thus contributing to technical inertia. Designers, machines and software are made invisible, thus hiding the choices that have been made during the processes.

> This will mean that the objects and the processes will become situated in the context where they were created, and this situating brings with it valuable knowledge about the different circumstances surrounding the creation.

> All processes that produce knowledge are situated, socially, culturally and historically.

> To exclude social and cultural aspects from knowledge and artefacts relates to attempts at universalising, a process that Donna Haraway, along with naturalising, sees as connected to the “view from nowhere”, the disembodied knowledge.

> information is considered to have objective semantic content. He defines  objective as “mind-independent or external, and informee-independent” (p. 42). This means that information exists independently of its encoding and transmission. This view tends to prioritise a view of information as ‘object’, rather than as process. Can information really be said to exist if there is no receiver, and if no communication is going on? Is information just lying around, waiting to be exposed?

> I oppose to this view of information. Instead, I take the position that information is,
(at least to a non-trivial extent), dependent on the position and situation of the informed
subject, dependent upon his or hers (situated) interpretation. This means a view that
focuses on the subject and the process, instead of on the object. I agree that data can
exist ‘in itself ’, but I think this is doubtful when it comes to information.


> To Colburn, abstractions are fundamental. He argues that “software developers need to become conversant in the analytical tools of philosophers”, such as logics, classifications, hierarchies “and other convenient abstractions.” (p. 325). This again, reveals a view that prioritises the abstract, disembodied knowledge. I want to argue that that is not what software developers primarily need today, instead they need the competencies connected with the domains of use, for example to understand and account for complexity and heterogeneity among users.

> Is the world understandable and describable in formal terms? My position is that it is
not. Whose world is captured in the formal methods/models? I believe a fundamental
question becomes: what is computing mostly about: formal systems and abstractions or
‘thinking things’, i.e. people? The answer to this question will depend to a great deal on
the view one takes not only of computer science, but also of technology on the whole,
and of course, of one’s epistemology.

> Colburn (p. 319) gives an interesting example regarding two fundamentally different views on programs: one that sees computer programs as mathematical expressions, and another that sees them from the perspective of functionality.

> the formal view (mathematical expressions) used to be the strongest, but is losing ground to the more use- and functionality oriented view.

## Paper C1 [175]
> Bringing up issues of gender in relation to technology, there is always a risk that the discussion comes to focus either on the missing women, and what could be done to increase the number of women, or on differences between men and women. The problem with these approaches is the underlying assumptions of technological determinism and/or essentialism in the view of men and women. This can result in a tendency to see women as the problem

> “In order to bring about a meeting of awarenesses, the teacher has to take the part of the learner,…see the experience through the learner’s eyes, become aware of the experience through the learner’s awareness.” (Marton and Both p. 179).
