+++
title = "A comparison of CPSC 110 and CPSC 210, from an educational standpoint"
date = 2022-04-06
draft = true
[extra]
updates = []
img = 'CPSC210.png'
alt = "Java Code and UML Diagram for Lucy's CPSC210 Project"
+++

*Disclaimer: I'm not a professor, just a student and teaching assistant for the course I will be talking about, so I will be talking about my experices, both as a student and teaching assistant*

[Learning to Code: Why we Fail, How We Flourish](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mkzHIhKaUX4)

It's easy to see applications of the natural sciences in society. Someone may study chemistry to learn how to synthesize drugs to treat diseases like cancer or HIV. Someone may study biology because they love plants! Additionally, someone may feel a personal connection to natural sciences, like myself. I study chemistry and biochemistry because of my history of an eating disorder. Once I learned about the damage I was doing to my body at the biochemical level, I worked hard to recover from an eating disorder. Similarly, looking at fats, carbs and proteins as the literal chemical building blocks for your body made me appreciate the privilege we have in being able to choosing which foods supply us with this vital building blocks for our organs. These two reasons I mentioned above may be what compel someone to study a natural science. 

Student's may use a computer in their life, but have little to no understanding of the inner workings of a computer. Using a computer is like riding the bus; it's just how life it. You may use Google Docs because your school requires you to. But you simply adore reading about chemistry because you like learning how your body works at the biochemical level. Thus, this the link between computer science and society, or computer science and yourself is harder to see. This is one problem computer science educators are trying to solve: how do we relate computer science to a student's life? How can we make computer science interesting? A student's first exposure to computer science is usually through programming. I experienced this dilemma myself in my first programming course. I couldn't understand or see why learning about recursion or binary trees related to anything! Unfortunately, many gender minorities may feel the same feeling of being divorced from their studies in computer science.  In fact, the lower ratio between women and men in computer science can be partially be explained by the idea that computer science doesn't have a positive impact on [society](TODO). 

Most computer science courses you take will have a programming component. In [Critically Conscience Computing](TODO), Amy J. Ko, PhD talks about several ways programming is usually taught, and the positives and negatives between the different methods. Having TAed CPSC 110 and CPSC 210, I've noticed some differences between how programming is taught , and thus the differences in students reactions to the course. Both courses are based around teaching students a type of programming paradigm. In CPSC 110, students are taught to think in a functional paradigm, while in CPSC 210, students are taught to think in a OOP and imperative paradigm. Both courses tackle teaching students how to program in a particular paradigm with a different method: problem sets and labs.  


## Problem Sets
The most common, consistent and probably easiest way to teach programming is through problem sets. Most courses at UBC use problem sets or labs to evaluate a student's understanding of course content. I'll define a problem set as a 

CPSC 110 uses problem sets to judge a student's ability to do domain analysis and to apply the appropriate template to a particular problem. Problem sets usually have 1 reference solution, but problem sets can be solved in alternative solutions. 

---


After students go to lecture, they must practice the knowledge they have learned to understand how to apply it. Simply reading or watching someone code does not imply a student can also code. A way to evaluate a student's ability to program is through problem sets. Problems sets are an easy way for an instructor to see a student's ability to code because problem sets can be issued after every lecture, or some consistent time interval, with questions targeting specific concepts or lectures. 

Since students will all do the same problem set, this ensures some level of fairness, since all students will be answering the same problems. However, as CCC mentions, problems sets may be divorced from someone's life. Most problem set questions may involve questions like "Traverse a tree numbers" or "Generate all the possible outcomes for a set of clowns". If a student is not intrinsically already interested in computer science, these type of questions in problem sets are usually divergent from a student's personal interests, and may make them less interested in computer science as a whole. In fact, I experienced this same feeling. I couldn't see or understand how these problem sets would give me skills to contribute positively to society.

While problem sets ensure a student is up to a standard of knowledge (if they can complete the problem set correctly, this means they have understood most of the material), they can feel rigid and impersonal to a student. A solution to this is to center a course around being project based.

## Project based courses
Project based courses aim to offer a personalised and individualised component for the student. Student's can conceptualize their own project, usually adhering to some rules that require using a certain programming language or implementing concepts like object orientated design.

Lectures were out of sync with project phases.

Grading was very lax, allowing student's to get very high marks, which masked their lack of understanding of the course content.

Lack of support for GUIs (TAs)

Student's never actually applied design patterns.

Only student's who had already programmed before did well. 

Many student's did poorly, but technically passed the rubric. Gloried arraylist.

Something I have witnessed is that students enjoy CPSC 210 more than CPSC 110. Should student enjoyment be prioritized over knowledge acquisition and knowledge application? 

Check: CPSC 210 doesn't really teach semantics, CPSC 110 does. 
