---
title: Thoughts on Minority Programs for CS
tags: computer science, computer science education
date: 2022-02-14
---

_Updated: 2022-05-20_

_Originally named: Thoughts based on my path to CS, and opinions on
CS Education_

.Some Lore
[%collapsible]
====
When I was in my first year of university, I began to believe that I
wasted my time in high school. I wished that I started learning about
computer science sooner. I had invested a lot of time into chemistry in
high school and then pivoted to majoring in computer science in
university. These two subjects don’t have much in relation at all. It
seemed like while everyone else (in computer science) was learning about
AI and web development, while I was busy learning chemistry and other
IB-related things (English IB HL people know how tough this course was).

By the end of my first year, I was utterly confused. In class, we
learned about graph traversals, proofs, and logic, but I kept hearing
everyone talk about doing "Full Stack" development. So I decided to
learn more about that and had a horrible time learning about it. I
wasn’t interested in HTML or JavaScript, and I didn’t want to build
websites. Due to my limited exposure to computer science, I was lead to
believe that computer science was just building websites! 
I did some hackathons and tried learning stuff over
the summer, but nothing stuck and I began to feel like this wasn’t the
path I wanted to take in university.

At the beginning of my second year, I was thinking of switching my major
(which was currently in computer science) to a major in
chemistry. That’s when I started taking more chemistry and health
science courses. And being in those chemistry classes was a fresh of
breath air for me; no one talked about JavaScript, internships, or side
projects. There was occasional talk about undergrad research, but the
environment in health science classes was less stifling for me than
computer science classes.

I think a reason for this is because everyone in health science classes
had more or less the same amount of knowledge. First and second-year
chemistry classes were enjoyable for me because I had taken Chemistry IB
HL. Biology, biochemistry, and microbiology classes were enjoyable for
me because I had the same basis of biology and chemistry as everyone
else. I didn’t feel like I was very behind in the same way that I
did in computer science classes. In my organic chemistry class, we were
collectively confused, which is a nice feeling to have vs. being the
only one confused.

In computer science, many of my classmates (mostly men) had already
started programming in high school. They talked among themselves about
topics I didn’t understand and were able to easily answer in-class
questions. It felt like a club I was shut out of because I wasn’t
spending time in high school programming. But when the midterm mark
distribution came out, I was never terribly below average; sometimes
above, and sometimes just average. So why did I always feel intimidated
and out of place?

I’m not sure. But now in my third year, I’m no longer regret how I spent my years in
high school because I enjoyed my time in high school.
Chemistry will always be something I love. For the longest time, I
couldn’t justify taking courses in chemistry or biochemistry in
university because I thought I should only spend money on courses that
had better a return. Wouldn’t it be better to spend money on a computer
science course that could allow me to make more money, than a chemistry
course that I was just interested in? I had this mindset for the first
two years of my undergrad degree. This resulted in me flip-flopping
between courses (never having a good timetable) and choosing courses
that "sounded good", rather than if I actually wanted to learn about
the topic. Eventually, I realized that I was wasting more time trying to
force myself to like some courses; what would happen if I took that
organic chemistry course instead of the databases course? Hopefully,
nothing much, because I’m in that organic chemistry course right now.
Additionally, I’ve found out that I’m interested in programming
languages (how they are designed) and operating systems/compilers (how
that programming language is turned into assembly and how hardware and
software communicate with each other). So I don’t think I’ll be taking
that database course.

== Why I no longer wish that I did computer science in high school

One large reason I never ventured into computer science in high school
was that I didn’t have good resources near me. Out of all the women in
my IB class, only 2 (including me) decided to not do a degree in the
health sciences. In my daily life, no one I talked to talked about
computer science.

One reason why I loved chemistry is that I had a wealth of resources
near me to foster that passion. I started learning about orbitals in
junior high and hand drew a periodic table that has hung in my room for
8 years. My father (who also shares the same passion for chemistry)
actively encouraged my interests and gave me resources so I could
self-learn at a young age. Additionally, the Science 10 (and junior
high) curriculum had chemistry integrated into it, so I didn’t have to
do much self-directed learning once I entered high school. I also had
friends I could talk to about chemistry, a teacher who was passionate
about teaching chemistry, and an advanced curriculum in chemistry thanks
to IB that went above and beyond the Alberta high school chemistry
curriculum.

On the other hand, I didn’t have any external factors for pursuing
computer science. The computer science program at my high school in
Calgary was unbeknownst to me (I didn’t know if they had a computer
science program at the time), my parents never really mentioned computer
science to me, and no one around me was talking about computer science.
I had never learned about computer science or even had it mentioned to
me until my last year of high school, which was when computer science
became the next hottest thing to major in.

I was scared that a major in chemistry would result in a futile career,
which is why I decided to major in computer science. I don’t like that
this was the reason for me to set foot into computer science, but I’m
glad this is no longer the reason that I’m staying. There are many
reasons why I’m staying:

* computers can help us in many other areas, like drug research and DNA sequencing
* the way computers work is very interesting; it’s both fragile and robust, like the way our bodies work. Crazy stuff.
* I like knowing exactly how something works. This is a reason why I’m
interested in low-level computing/compiler/operating systems. Lots of
abstractions hide the ugly details, but I like to know those ugly details.

Many university courses helped me realize those reasons why I’m staying
in computer science; CPSC 110 and CPSC 213. Not only did I enjoy the
content, but the professors inspired me and interested me!

CPSC 110 taught me so many concepts I didn’t even know I was learning. I learned about:
* data structures like graphs and linked lists and how we can use data structures to model data from the real world
* graph traversals, to extract relationships out of data structures 
* program design 
* test-driven development 
* abstraction

CPSC 213 was the course that FINALLY allowed me to understand: 
* pointers 
* how code becomes understandable to a computer 
* how and why a stack overflow can occur from too many recursive calls 
* why we care about memory usage

I’m excited about higher-level courses, and to also combine what I will
learn in computer science with chemistry and biochemistry. I don’t think
learning computer science in high school would have resulted in where I
am today. Taking my first computer science in university from a
world-renown professor who tailored the course for years, has shaped the
way I think about programming and computer science differently; I think
about code in a more functional paradigm than an imperative paradigm.
The computer science curriculum at my high school touches on OOP
concepts and imperative programming before recursion and functional
programming concepts. I’m glad I was introduced to functional
programming concepts before imperative ones because this has made
learning concepts in other classes much easier. The way a university
lays out its computer science curriculum is more thought out than a high
school one (I think, at least in high schools from Calgary), so this is
also another reason I no longer regret how I spent my time in high
school.
====

I’ve always wondered if it would of been better had I been introduced to
computer science through programs like KodeWithKlossy or SheCodes, which
claim to fight the gender imbalance in computer science. With the points
I discuss below, I’m glad I didn’t partake in any of these programs, as
I’m sure I would of actually been turned off from computer science.

== My thoughts on "minority" focussed programs

There’s many programs that are targeted towards minorities in computer
science. To me, most of them seem to almost be preying on this minority
issue in computer science for their gain or don’t seem to actually be
helping.

One I don’t particularly like is KodeWithKlossy. Their programs seem
highly inaccessible to those who really need it and have a lacking
curriculum. Their programs focus on web development and iOS app
development. iOS app development is already inaccessible; only MacBooks
can run the required software (XCode) that is needed to develop an iOS
app. If you don’t have access to a laptop, you sure aren’t buying a
MacBook as your first. I never (and still don’t) have had MacBook, so
that program would simply be out of my reach. And if MacBooks were
provided during the program, I wouldn’t be able to use those skills
outside of the program unless KodeWithKlossy gave everyone a MacBook,
which they probably aren’t. Additionally, after looking at the final
projects created for the web development program, they are very simple
and don’t highlight key areas of computer science like problem-solving
(through algorithms), abstraction, or operating systems, to just name a
few. I’m sure if I took KodeWithKlossy, I would not want to go into
computer science because building websites is not very interesting to
me.

Another reason why these programs are highly inaccessible is due to
cost. For instance, one three-week KodeWithKlossy
programfootnote:[https://precollege.barnard.edu/kodewithklossy[Kode With
Klossy, Powered by Barnard]] cost 8795 USD. If the program ran for 3
weeks, 8 hours a day, this cost comes down to 52 USD per hour.

image::/images/cs-edu/kwk.gif[]
image::/images/cs-edu/kwk.png[]

In comparison, the price breakdown for CPSC 110 at UBC: - 13 weeks of
instruction - 3 hours of lecture per week - 3 hours of lab per week -
countless instructor and TA office hours (not counted in the
calculation)

Would result in at least 78 hours, giving us 9 CAD per hour of lecture
or lab. And this is not counting the many office hours students can get
in addition to lectures and labs. Additionally, the course curriculum has been developed by and improved upon 
by many individualsfootnote:[https://felleisen.org/matthias/Thoughts/Developing_Developers.html[Developing Developers]].

It is simply appalling for anyone to pay this much for a program that
isn’t even a college or university course.

Another program I don’t like is
SheCodesfootnote:[https://www.shecodes.io/[SheCodes]] which to me seems
to prey on women trying to transition to a career in tech by teaching
them web development (the number of people specializing in web
development is increasing quickly, and the field is becoming very
inflated. Telling people that learning web development will get them a
job or high salary may not be true in a few years.). Oh, and SheCodes
isn’t free.

"Reform efforts driven by serving capitalist labor markets tended not to be concerned with who learns, as long as they are learning well and serving industry."
-- Amy, https://criticallyconsciouscomputing.org/[Critically Conscious Computing]

This quote drives the point home that programs like KodeWithKlossy and
SheCodes don’t seem to really focus on helping those who are
economically unable to seek out CS education, but those who have the
money and time and who can quickly become low level workers in the industry; women are more likley to be stuck in junior positions and have a harder time being promotedfootnote:[https://www.cnet.com/tech/tech-industry/young-women-dominate-in-software-but-still-face-setbacks-says-hackerrank/[Young women dominate in software, but still face setbacks]]. Skill programs mainly produce employment at the lower rung of the information economy that is temporary, gendered and vulnerable to exploitationfootnote:[Hicks, M., Mullaney, T. S., Peters, B., Philip, K., &amp; Sarkar, S. (2021). Skills Will Not Set You Free. In Your computer is on fire (pp. 297–311). essay, MIT Press. ].

The curriculum also seems very shallow, focussing on trendy and hot vocational skills like web development and iOS development (I tried finding a more in depth
curriculum but I couldn’t). Is that bad? I think so, but others may
think not, if their aim is to teach gender minorities vocational skills
so they can quickly get a job. Maybe focussing on gender minorities
frames KodeWithKlossy as doing good (and not harm). But regardless of
how many women-focussed boot camps emerge, technical training does not
erase race, class, and gender-based assumptions of what technically
trained people look likefootnote:skills[Hicks, M., Mullaney, T. S., Peters, B., Philip, K.,
Sarkar, S., & Abbate, J. (2021). SKILLS WILL NOT SET YOU FREE. In Your
Computer Is on Fire (pp. 302–309). essay, MIT Press.].

Another issue is that these programs (KodeWithKlossy and
SheCodesfootnote:[https://www.shecodes.io/[SheCodes]]) mainly/only teach
"front-end" web development, which is quickly becoming a
woman-dominated field. Historically, when women enter certain fields, it
lowers the value of that field. Front-end development is now seen as
easier than back-end development. In fact, "Front-end jobs are
easier for women to obtain, and feminized jobs are less
prestigiousfootnote:[https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/mar/14/tech-women-code-workshops-developer-jobs[We
can teach women to code, but that just creates another problem]]".

Sadly, KodeWithKlossy and SheCodes capitalize on shoving vocational skills, usually in web development, 
down women’s throats as their path into tech. Skills-based programs like KodeWithKlossy and SheCodes are
similar to the skills programs taught to women in Seelampur, which
mainly produced employment at the lower rung of the information economy,
meaning that these jobs are temporary, gendered and vulnerable to
exploitationfootnote:skills[].

"The computing historian Marie Hicks can’t stand it
when people tout coding camps as a solution to technology’s gender
problem. “I think these initiatives are well-meaning, but they
misunderstand the problem. The pipeline is not the problem; the
meritocracy is the problem. The idea that we’ll just stuff people into
the pipeline assumes a meritocracy that does not exist."
-- Miriam Posner, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/mar/14/tech-women-code-workshops-developer-jobs#:~:text=masculinity%20seizes%20prestige.-,Front%2Dend%20jobs%20are%20easier%20for%20women%20to%20obtain%2C%20and,women%20are%20front%2Dend%20developers[We can teach women to code, but that just creates another problem]

If you do like web development, you can learn the same things
KodeWithKlossy and SheCodes teaches (and way more) at
freecodecampfootnote:[https://www.freecodecamp.org/[freeCodeCamp]] FOR
FREE.

_KodeWithKlossy does have a free version too, but the curriculum and
topics are lacking (only focussing on front-end for web development) and
exclusionary (iOS development). I don’t know much about data science but
it’s nice to see that as an area to learn about._

image::/images/cs-edu/kwk-free.png[]
image::/images/cs-edu/kwk-free-curr.png[]

Now, there are programs that I think are doing a better job at
introducing minorities in computer science to what computer science
actually is. Jane
Streetfootnote:[https://www.janestreet.com/join-jane-street/our-programs/[Jane
Street: Our Programs]] has programs ranging from a few days to a few
weeks teaching concepts like OCaml, probability, arbitrage, and even
some business concepts!

From their
INSIGHTfootnote:[https://www.janestreet.com/join-jane-street/our-programs/insight/[Jane
Street: INSIGHT]] program:

____
In the software engineering program, students will learn about OCaml and
the libraries and tools that we use in our everyday work, as well as the
fundamentals of building electronic trading systems. Then, they’ll put
these tools to use by writing the back-end and UI for a computer game
and a program that trades on a simulated stock exchange.
____

I really like their focus on using a functional programming language
like OCaml, their mention of libraries (very important), tools (also
very important), and also financial concepts (which I never got to learn
and still haven’t). These topics are not only super interesting, but
involve topics in computer science like problem-solving, creating tested
and robust programs (you would hope a trading system works correctly!),
and involving the use of technology that can be installed on any
operating system. The program also mentions learning about the back-end
(which many boot camps/programs don’t seem to dive into). Oh, and to my
knowledge, this program is also free of cost. Below you can see the
other types of programs they offer:

image::/images/cs-edu/janestreet.gif[]

Of course, while Jane Street’s programs are much better than
SheCodes/KodeWithKlossy’s programs, these programs are not enough. There
needs to be a lot of change in society, education and industry for
minorities to have their voices heard and to feel like they truly have a
place in computer science and tech.

"If the exclusion of minorities is naturalized as
reflecting their lack of merit, rather than a moral failing within the
industry, then diversity initiatives can only be justified in economic
terms as a strategy to improve products or make companies more
competitive."
--  Janet Abbate, https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/your-computer-fire[Your Computer is on Fire]

Including the perception of what is a good "software engineer".

[quote, Janet Abbate, Your Computer is on Fire]
____
The myth of the superstar coder encourages managers to
reward men’s "heroic" last-­minute problem-­solving over women’s
proactive efforts to prevent crises from occurring in the first place.
____

== Final thoughts

I think that computer science should be taught the same way as
chemistry, biology, and physics for younger children. Learning physics
doesn’t mean you’re a physicist, and that should become the norm with
computer science. Also, when teaching a child science, you don’t start
throwing formulas and abstract concepts at them, you start with examples
and talk about endeavours and discoveries done by humans in the field.

Youth should not be introduced to computer science through HTML and JavaScript, which
is what many minority focussed CS programs are doing. We need to explore
the rich history of computing! Just like how we learn about the
models of the atom and different acid-base theories in chemistry in 
junior high and high school and then
utilize models like the valence bond theory and hybridization in
university, I think we should learn that computing begins from the
invention of the abacus to human "computers" in WWII, and how we
abstracted the human computer into the metal and inanimate computers we
have today.

Computer science can’t keep being taught as just coding, and we should
focus on other areas of computer science like operating systems, memory
and data management, history and ethics and programming languages. Orgs
focussing on young children should use Critically Conscious Computing
as a basis for developing a curriculum.

We can’t forget that computer science is also math; it’s basically
applied math, so we should also teach computer science in a similar way
that math is taught. This would be the job for universities. Once
younger students learn more about the history of computer science,
learning the math behind computer science like recursion, graphs,
operating systems, compilers, and more will allow them to make
connections in what they learned when they were younger. I think the
university curriculum at UBC is pretty good, but I am not qualified at
all to judge that. This would have been the path to computer science I
wished to take. Essentially, teach computer science like science to
younger children, and then teach computer science like math to older
children.

Boot camps should seek with university professors and industry folks to
deliver a condensed but in depth curriculum over a longer span of time.
You simply can’t learn computer science or coding in 2 weeks, or even 2
months. UBC’s
BCSfootnote:[https://www.cs.ubc.ca/students/undergrad/degree-programs/bcs-program-second-degree[BCS
Program (Second Degree)]] program is a great program for folks who
already have a degree (that’s not in computer science) looking to enter
software development, as this 2 year program cuts out all the annoying
breadth courses (like first year English) a regular university student
would take, while making sure core courses like Algorithm Design and
Analysisfootnote:[https://courses.students.ubc.ca/cs/courseschedule?pname=subjarea&tname=subj-course&dept=CPSC&course=320[CPSC
320]] and Computer Hardware and Operating
Systemsfootnote:[https://courses.students.ubc.ca/cs/courseschedule?pname=subjarea&tname=subj-course&dept=CPSC&course=313[CPSC
313]] are included. The program is also at a comparative or even cheaper
price than most boot camps, and offer a much higher quality of
education.

If boot camps want to be the cheaper and quicker alternative to
university, or if organizations want to educate young people on computer
science, they must commit to delivering a well rounded education in
computer science, that includes theory and vocational skills, or they
are simply exploiting people for their own gain.

_Updates: typos and added better photos. Changed to mainly/only teach
front-end because there is now some focus on back-end but not really
what back-end concepts. Added more to final thoughts._

